---
layout:      post
title:       "OCA Review 8 - Notes"
lang:                en
date:        "2017-04-06 21:01:34 +0200"
categories:  [java-core]
tags:        [java, oca]
excerpt:     >
  Today, I want to write blog post to summarize all the important review notes
  for Oracle Certification Associate (OCA) - Java SE 8 Programmer. This article
  will be separated into several subjects: Java basics, Java data types, methods
  and encapsulation, core APIs, flow control, inheritance, and exception
  handling.
permalink:         /2017/04/06/oca-review-8-notes/
comments:    true
article_header:
  type: overlay
  theme: dark
  background_color: "#203028"
  background_image:
    gradient: "linear-gradient(135deg, rgba(0, 0, 0, .6), rgba(0, 0, 0, .4))"
---

Today, I want to write blog post to summarize all the important review notes
for Oracle Certification Associate (OCA) - Java SE 8 Programmer. This post will
be separated into several subjects. They're:

1. Java Basics
2. Java Data Types
3. Methods and Encapsulation
4. Java Core APIs
5. Flow control
6. Inheritance
7. Exception Handling

## Java Basics

- Check access modifier
- Check non-access modifier
- Check return type
- Check method type (constructor, getter / setter)
- Check parameter types

{% highlight java %}
public static void main(String[] args) { ... }
// ^   ^      ^    ^    ^
// |   |      |    |    +- parameter type(s)
// |   |      |    +- method type
// |   |      +- return type
// |   +- non-access modifier
// +- access modifier
{% endhighlight %}

**Java Packages**

- An `import` statement allows to import a class or interface.
- An `import` statement allows to import a package using wildcard `*`.
- An `import static` statement allows to import a static method.
- An `import static` statement allows to import all the static methods of the
target class using wildcard `*`.
- If a `package` statement is present, it must be the first non-commented line
  of code in the file.

**Compilation**

- If a variable declaration fails to compile, then all the following lines
  which use this variable will fail to compile, because variable is undefined.
- A local variable must be initialized before being used. Otherwise, Java fails
  to compile at those lines where this variable is used.
- A local variable is not required to be initialized if it is not used.

## Java Data Types

**Primitives**

- Characters `char` can be concatenated, such as `'a' + 'b'`. When doing so,
  they are considered as integer using their corresponding value in ASCII
  table.
- Binary number starts with the prefix `0b` or `0B`, e.g. `0b1101`.
- Octal number starts with the prefix `0`, e.g. `011`.
- Decimal number does not start with `0`, e.g. `11`.
- Hexadecimal number starts with the prefix `0x`, e.g. `0xAAA`.
- A literal ends with a character could be a `float`, a `double`, a `long`, or
  a hexadecimal number.
- A `long` can be assigned using an integer `int`, because Java knows how to
  widen the type.
- An integer cannot be assigned as a decimal number automatically.
- Wrapper classes `Byte`, `Short`, `Integer`, and `Long` cache objects with
  values in the range of `-128` to `127`.
- Wrapper class `Character` caches objects with values `0` to `127`.
- Wrapper class `Boolean` has 2 cached instances, `Boolean.TRUE` and
  `Boolean.FALSE`. They're accessible directly because only two exist.
- `Int` is not defined in the Java API, the correct wrapper class for `int` is
  `Integer`.
- `Bool` is not defined in the Java API, the correct wrapper class for `boolean`
  is `Boolean`.

**Operators**

- The logical operator AND `&&` has a higher operator precedence than the
  operator `||`.

## Methods and Encapsulation

**Constructor**

- Initializer blocks are used to initialize the variables of anonymous classes.
- A constructor must not define any return type.
- A default constructor (a public, non-argument constructor) is generated by
  JVM if and only if there's no constructor defined by user.
- A constructor does not have return type, e.g. `void`
- If a subclass does not make an explicit call to a parent constructor, the
  compiler attempts to compensate for this by insert a call to the default
  no-argument constructor `super()`. **However, this will fail if there's no
  such constructor in the parent class.**
- Subclass must make an explicit call to the parent constructor with the
  `super()` command if parent does not have a no-argument constructor.
- Overloaded constructors cannot be defined by just a change in the access
  levels.
- A constructor can call another overloaded constructor by using the keyword
  `this`.
- A constructor cannot invoke a constructor by using its class's name.
- If present, the call to another constructor must be the first statement in a
  constructor.

{% highlight java %}
public class A {
  // Method A
  public void A() { ... }

  // Constructor A
  public A() { ... }
}
{% endhighlight %}

**Interface**

- Interface methods are assumed to be `public` and `abstract` even if they're
  not written as modifier. Therefore, a class implementing the methods of an
  interface must follow the same accessibility: `public`.
- Interface method cannot be marked `static` or `default` if it is already
  marked `abstract`.
- A `static` method in an interface can't be called using a reference variable.
  It must be called using the interface name.
- Unlike an interface, if you define a `static` method in a base class, it can
  be accessed using either a reference variable or the class name.

**Method**

- Overloaded method means the method name is the same and the method parameter
  list is different. Anything else is allowed to vary. Remember that Java is
  case sensitive.
- Overloaded methods may or may not define a different return type.
- Overloaded methods may or may not define different access levels.
- Return type is not part of a method signature.
- If you try to execute a method using values that can be passed to multiple
  overloaded methods, in this case, the code will fail to compile.
- Java prefers the most specific overloaded signature it can find.
- Java prefers a single object over a vararg parameter.
- Java prefers an autoboxed parameter over a vararg parameter.
- The `return` statement need not be the last statement in a method, but it
  must be the last statement to execute in a method.
- If the compiler determines that a `return` statement isn't the last
  statement to _execute_ in a method, the method will fail to compile.
- If the return type of a method is `int`, the method can return a value of
  type `byte`.
- If a `char` variable gets expanded among a list of overloaded methods, it
  will be expanded to its nearest type, e.g. `int` instead of `long`.
- If the return type of a method is `int`, the method can return a value of
  type `byte`.

**Garbage Collection**

- You can only determine which objects are eligible to be garbage collected.
- You cannot determine when a particular object will be garbage collected. The
  execution of a garbage collector is controlled by the JVM.
- Removing all references to an object makes the object eligible for garbage
  collection, but the rules of garbage collection do not guarantee when the this
  deletion from memory will occur.
- The method `java.lang.Object#finalize()` has `protected` modifier.
- The method `finalize` is called when the object is first attempted to be
  garbage collected.
- The method `finalize` will not be called more than once for the same instance.
- A group of instances with no external references forms an island of
  isolation. which is eligible for garbage collection.
- A garbage collector is a low-priority thread, and its exact execution time
  will depend on the OS. The OS will start this thread if it needs to claim
  unused space. You can only be sure how many objects are eligible for GC.

## Java Core APIs

**String**

- All the string literals are automatically instantiated into a `String`
  object.
- Whenever the JRE receives a new request to initialize a `String` variable
  using the assignment operator, it checks whether a `String` object with the
  same value already exists in the string pool.
- `String` objects created using the operator `new` are never placed in the
  string pool.
- The method `substring` does not include the character at the end position.

**String Builder**

- `StringBuilder` and `StringBuffer` have the same methods.
- `StringBuilder` has a constructor without any parameter.
- `StringBuilder` has a constructor with a customized capacity as `int`.
- `StringBuilder` has a constructor with a default capacity and an initial word
  as `String`.
- `StringBuilder` does not have method `trim`.
- `StringBuilder` does not have method `concat`.
- `StringBuilder#subSequence(int, int)` does not modify the content of builder,
  a new string is returned.

**Arrays**

- An array itself is an object.
- The creation of an array involves three steps: declaration of an array,
  allocation of an array, and initialization of array elements.
- An array is an object, so it's allocated using the keyword `new`.
- Elements of an array that store primitive data types store `0` for integer
  types (`byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`).
- Elements of an array that store primitive data types store `0.0` for decimal
  types (`float`, `double`).
- Elements of an array that store primitive data types store `false` for
  `boolean`.
- Elements of an array that store primitive data types store `/u0000` for
  `char` data.
- A multidimensional array can be asymmetrical. it may or may not define the
  same number of columns for each of its rows.
- Array anonymous initializer is only allowed in the declaration.

{% highlight java %}
String[] arr = { "A", "B", "C" }; // OK
arr = { "C", "B", "A" }; // Does not compile!
{% endhighlight %}

**ArrayList**

- `ArrayList#remove(Object o)` removes the first occurrence of the specified
  element from this list, if it is present.
- Using generics only on one side in a declaration is allowed, so
  `List<Integer> nums = new ArrayList();` compiles. However, this is not
  suggested. An unchecked warning will be issued by the compiler.
- It's not possible to remove elements from an `ArrayList` while iterating
  through it using a `for` loop.
- `indexOf(Object o)` returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified
  element in the list, or `-1` if the list doesn't contain the element.
- An `ArrayList` can store any type of object.
- `ArrayList#contains(Object)` compares value and not reference.
- `ArrayList` has overridden the default `toString` method, so an empty array
  list prints `[]`.

**Date**

- `LocalDate` instances are immutable.
- All the methods that seem to manipulate `LocalDate`'s value return a copy of
  the `LocalDate` instance on which it's called.
- The `withXX` methods return a copy of `LocalDate`'s value replacing the
  specified day, month, or year in it.
- `LocalTime` stores time to nanosecond precision.
- `LocalDate` doesn't define a `plus()` method, which accepts an integer value
  to be added to it. You should use `plusXXX` where the expression can be days,
  weeks, months, years.
- Cannot use a `DateTimeFormatter` to format a date object, because it has no
  time.

**Lambda Expression**

- Parentheses can be omitted ONLY if there's one parameter and the parameter
  type is not declared. So, `(String s) -> ...` or `s -> ...`.
- When braces are used around the body, the `return` keyword and the semicolon
  are required. For example, `p -> { return p.getAge() < 5; }`
- Lambdas work only with functional interfaces—interfaces that define exactly
  one `abstract` method.
- Each lambda expression has multiple optional and mandatory sections:
  - Parameter type (optional)
  - Parameter name (mandatory)
  - Arrow (mandatory)
  - Curly braces (optional)
  - Keyword `return` (optional)
  - Lambda body (mandatory)
- The return type of the functional method `test` in the functional interface
  `Predicate` is `boolean`. If you try to return another type, the code fails to
  compile. So `Predicate<String> p = (s) -> s == null ? "A" : "B";` is
  incorrect.
- A simple lambda expression could be written in one line:
  `Validate v = p -> p.getAge() <= 26;`

## Flow control

- The braces `{}` are required for methods, `try` blocks, and `catch` blocks
  even if there's only one statement inside.
- If there're duplicate constant values in a `switch` statements, all the
  duplicate cases will raise a compile error.
- The `default` case executes only of no matching values are found. In this
  case.

## Inheritance

**Interface**

- All interface variables are implicitly assumed `public static final`. For
  these variables, they mush declare a value when they are initialized.
  Otherwise, the compilation fails.

**Method**

- The access modifier of an inherited method cannot be more restrictive than
  its parent.

## Exception Handling

- Exceptions are divided into three categories: checked exceptions, runtime
  (unchecked) exceptions, and errors.
- You should not handle errors.
- If a method throws a checked exception, it must be either handled by the
  method or specified in its `throws` clause.
- If a method throws a runtime exception, it may include the exception in its
  `throws` clause.
- An exception is an object of the class `java.lang.Throwable`.
- When calling a method having checked exception(s), you must handle them
  properly, e.g. `throws` from method or adding a `try ... catch` block.
- If a method declares to throw a checked exception, its body can't throw a more
  general exception.
- Error is not a checked or unchecked exception.
- If the creation of an object calls itself recursively without an exit
  condition, it will result a `java.lang.StackOverflowError`. For example:
  `class MyClass { MyClass my = new MyClass(); }`.
- `ExceptionInInitializerError` may be thrown by the JVM when a `static`
  initializer in your code throws a `NullPointerException`.

## Other notes

- Consider yourself as the Java Compiler
- Read the question carefully. Be careful about the assumption, or the given
  context.
- Read all the options before answer a question. Sometimes multiple choices are
  correct.
- Be careful about the name of variable, e.g. `s1` and `s2` may be used in a
  mixed way to confuse you.
- You cannot assume the `import` statement if the code snippet displayed starts
  from line 1. (No previous lines can be hidden in this case.)
- Be careful about the application entry point, it must be `public static void`
  where the position of `public static` can be changed.
